the following content is provided under
a Creative Commons license your support
will help MIT open courseware continue
to offer highquality educational
resources for free to make a donation or
to view additional materials from
hundreds of MIT courses visit MIT open
courseware at
ocw.mit.edu let me start by basically
listing the main things we've learned
over the past 3 weeks or so and I'll add
a few complements of information about
that because there's a few small details
that I didn't quite clarify and that I
should you know probably make a bit
clearer especially what happened at the
very end of yesterday's
class
so here's a list of things that should
be on your review sheet for the
exam so the first thing we learned about
the main topic of this unit is about
functions of several
variables so we've learned how to think
of functions of two or three variables
in terms of plotting them in particular
well not only the graph but also the
Contour plot and how to read a contour
plot and we've learned how to study
variation
of these functions using partial
derivatives so remember we've defined
the partial of f with respect to some
variables say x to be the rate of change
with respect to X when we hold all the
other variables
constant so if you have a function of X
and Y this symbol means you
differentiate with respect to X treating
y as a
constant
and we've learned how to package partial
derivatives into a vector the gradient
Vector so for example if we have a
function of three variables that's
just the vector with components are the
partial derivatives and we've seen how
to use the gradient Vector of the
partial derivatives to derive various
things such as approximation
formulas so the change in F when we
change X Y and Z slightly is
approximately equal to well there's
several
terms and I can rewrite this in Vector
form as the gradient do
product the amount by which the position
Vector has changed okay so basically
what causes F to change is that I'm
changing X Y and Z by small amounts and
how sensitive f is to each variable is
precisely what the partial derivatives
measure and in particular we can use so
this
approximation is called the tangent
plane approximation because it tells us
in
fact it amounts to identifying the graph
of a function with its tangent plane it
means that we assume that the function
depends more or less linearly on XYZ and
if we set this things equal what we get
is actually we're replacing the function
by its linear approximation we're
replacing the graph by its tangent
plane except of course we haven't seen
the graph of a function of three
variables because that would live in
four dimensional space so when we think
of the graph that's really with a
function of two
variables um that also tells us how to
find tangent planes to level
surfaces
so recall that the tangent
plane to a surface
given by the equation F of
xyzal C at a given point can be
found by looking first for its normal
vector and we know that the normal
Vector is actually well one normal
Vector is given by the gradient of a
function because we know that the
gradient is actually
pointing perpendicularly to the level
set towards higher values of a function
it gives us the direction of fastest
increase of a
function okay any questions about these
topics
no okay so let me add actually a
cultural note to what we've seen so far
about partial derivatives and how to use
them which is maybe something I should
have mentioned a couple of weeks ago
um so why do we like partial derivatives
well one obvious reason is we can do all
these things but another reason is that
really you need partial derivatives to
do physics and to do actually to
understand much of the world that's
around you because a lot of things
actually are governed by what's called
partial differential
equations okay okay so that's if you
want a cultural remark about what this
is good for so a partial differential
equation is an equation that involves
the partial derivatives of a function
okay so you have some function that's
unknown that depends on a bunch of
variables and a partial differential
equation is some relation between its
partial derivatives
so let me see these are equations
involving the partial
derivatives of an
unknown
function so let me give you an example
to say to see how that works so for
example the heat equation
is one example of a partial differential
equation it's the
equation well let me write you write for
you the space version of
it it's the equation partial F partial T
equals some constant times the sum of
the second partials with respect to X Y
and
Z so this is an equation where we're
trying to solve for a function f that
depends actually on four
variables XYZ and
T and what should you think of you know
what what should you have in mind well
this equation governs temperature so if
you think that F of XYZ T will be the
temperature at a point in space at
position XYZ and at time T then this
tells you how temperature changes over
time it tells you that at any given
point the rate of change of temperature
over time is given by this complicated
expression in the partial derivatives in
terms of the space coordinates
XYZ so if you know for example the
initial distribution of temperature in
this room and if you assume that nothing
is generating heat or taking heat away
so if you don't have any air
conditioning or heating going on then
will tell you how the temperature will
change over time and eventually
stabilize to some final value
yes why do we take the partial
derivative twice well that's a question
I say um I'd say it's a question for a
physics person but actually I'm going to
no in a few weeks we'll actually see a
derivation of where this equation comes
from and try to justify it but really
that's something you will see in a
physics class okay uh the reason for
that is basically
physics of how heat is transported
between you know particles in a fluid or
actually in any medium but uh this
constant K actually is called the heat
conductivity it tells you how well the
heat flows through the material that
you're looking
at um so anyway I I'm giving it to you
just you know to show you an example of
a real life problem where in fact you
have to solve one of these things so now
how to solve partial differential
equations is not topic for this class
it's not even a topic for 1803 which is
called differential equations without
partial uh which means there actually
you will learn tools to study and solve
these equations but when there's only
one variable involved and you'll see
it's already quite
hard um and if you want more then later
on we have many fine classes about
partial differential equations but you
know one thing at the
time um so just I wanted to point out to
you that very often functions that you
see in real life satisfy many nice
relations between their partial
derivatives okay so that was you know in
case you were wondering why on the
syllabus for today it said partial
differential equations now we've
officially covered the topic that's
basically all we need to know about it
okay but we'll get back to that a bit
later you'll
see
okay if there's no further questions let
me continue and go back to my list of
topics oh sorry I should have written
down
okay but this equation is solved by
temperature at for Point XYZ at time
T
okay and there are actually many other
interesting partial differential
equations you will maybe sometime learn
about the wave equation that governs how
waves propagate in
space um about the diffusion equation
which tells you how you know when you
have maybe a mixture of two fluids how
they somehow mix over time and so on
there's basically to every problem you
might want to consider there's a partial
differential equation to
solve okay anyway sorry back to my list
of
topics so one important application
we've seen of partial derivatives is to
try to optimize things try to solve
minimum maximum
problems so
remember that
we've introduce the notion of critical
points of a
function so a critical point is
when all the partial derivatives are
zero
and then there are various kinds of
critical points there are Maxima there's
Minima but there's also settle
points and we've seen a method using
second
derivatives to decide which kind of
critical point we
have so you should say that's for a
function of two
variables to try to decide whether a
given critical point is a minimum a
maximum or a settle
point and we've also seen that actually
that's not enough to find the minimum or
the maximum of a function because the
minimum of the maximum could occur on
the boundary so just to give you a small
reminder when you have a function of one
variable you know if you're trying
to find the minimum and the maximum
of say a function whose graph looks like
this well you're going to tell me quite
obviously that the maximum is this point
up here and that's a point where the
first derivative is zero that's a
critical point and we use the second
derivative to see that this critical
point is a local
maximum but then when we looking for the
minimum of the function well it's not at
a critical point it's actually here at
the boundary of the domain of you know
the range of values that we're going to
consider
so here the minimum is at the
boundary and the
maximum is at a critical
point so similarly when you have a
function of several variables say of two
variables for example then the minimum
and the maximum will be achieved either
at a critical point and then we can use
these methods to find where they are or
somewhere on the boundary of the set of
values that are allowed so it could be
that you know we actually achieve
minimum by making X and Y as small as
possible maybe letting them go to zero
if they had to be positive or maybe by
making them go to
Infinity so we have to keep our minds
open and you know look at various
possibilities so we're going to do a
problem like that uh we're going to go
over the practice problem from the
practice
test to clarify
this so another important cultural
application of minimum maximum problems
in two variables that we've seen in
class is the least squares method to
find the best fit line of the best fit
anything really to you know find when
you have a set of data points
what's the best linear approximation
through these data points
and here I have some good news for you
while you should definitely know what
this is about it will not be on the
test okay
okay that doesn't mean that you should
forget everything we've seen about it
okay
now what's next on my list of
topics so we've
seen
differentials so remember the differ of
f by
definition would be this kind of
quantity so at first it looks just like
a new way to package partial derivatives
together into some new kind of object
now what is this good for well it's a
good way to remember approximation
formulas it's a good way to also study
how variations in XYZ relate to
variations in F in particular we can
divide this by variations
of by actually by DX or by Dy or by DZ
in any situation that we want to find or
by D of some other variable to get chain
rules so the chain rule says for example
well there's many different situations
but for example if X Y and Z depend on
some other variable say the variables
maybe even u and
v then that means that F becomes a
function of u and v and then we can ask
ourselves how sensitive is
f to the value of U
and well we can answer
that so the chain Ru is something like
this and let me explain to you again
where this
form so
basically what this quantity means is if
we change U and keep V constant what
happens to the value of f well why would
the value of f change in the first place
when f is just a function of XYZ and not
directly of U well it changes because X
Y and Z depend on you so first we have
to figure out how quickly X Y and Z
change when we change U well how quickly
we do that is precisely partial X
partial U partial y partial U partial Z
partial U these are the rates of change
of x y z when we change U and now when
we change X Y and Z that causes F to
change how much does f change well
partial F partial X tells us how quickly
F changes if I just change X so I get
this that's the change in F caused just
by the fact that X changes when U
changes but then y also changes y
changes at this rate and that causes F
to change at that rate and Z changes as
well and that causes F to change at that
rate and the effects add up together
does that make sense
okay and so in particular we can use the
chain rule to do changes of variables if
we have say a function defined in terms
of polar coordinates R and Theta and we
like to switch it to rectangular
coordinates X and Y then we can use
chain rules to relate the partial
derivatives and finally last but not
least we've seen how to deal with
non-independent variables
so when our variables say XY Z are
related by some
equation so one way we can deal with
this is to solve for one of the
variables and get go back to two
independent variables but we can't
always do that of course on the exam you
can be sure that I will make sure that
you cannot solve for the variable you
want to remove because that would be too
easy um so then when we have to keep all
of them but handle you take take into
account this relation we've seen two
useful methods one of them is to
find the minimum or the
maximum of a function when the variables
are not independent and that's the
method of lrange multipliers
so remember to find the minimum or
maximum of a function f subject to the
constraint g equals constant well we
write
down equations that say that the
gradient of f is actually proportional
to the gradient of G
so there's a new variable here Lambda
the
multiplier
and so you know for example if FG well I
guess here I had functions of three
variables so this becomes three
equations F subx = Lambda g subx f sub
yal Lambda G suby and F subz = Lambda G
subz and when we plug in the formulas
for f and g well we're left with three
equations involving the four variables x
y z and Lambda what's wrong well we
don't have actually four independent
variables we also have this
relation g equals well whatever the
constraint was relating X Y and Z
together so then we can try to solve
this and depending on situations it's
sometimes easy and sometimes it's very
hard or even
impossible um so in particular on the
test I haven't decided yet but it could
well be that the problem about lrange
multipliers will just ask you to write
the equations not to solve them okay
so well I don't know
yet okay I'm not promising anything but
just you
know before you start solving check
whether the problem asks you to solve
them or not okay if it doesn't
then probably you shouldn't
[Music]
whoops
okay
so another topic that we saw just
yesterday is constraint partial
derivatives and I guess I have to re
explain a little bit
because my guess is that things were not
extremely clear at the end of class
yesterday so now we in the same
situation we have a
function let's say
F of
XYZ where the variables x y and z are
not independent but are constrained by
some relation of this form so some
quantity involving X Y and Z is equal to
maybe zero or some other constant and
then what we want to know is what is the
rate of change of f with respect to one
of the variables say X or Y or Z when I
keep the other con
well I can't keep all the others
constant because that wouldn't be
compatible with
this with this condition I mean that
would be the usual or So-Cal formal
partial derivative of f ignoring the
constraint to take this into account
means that if we vary one variable while
keeping another one fixed then the third
one since it depends on them must also
change somehow and we must take that
into
account
so let's say for example we want to
find because I'm going to do a different
example from yesterday so that if you
really didn't like that one you don't
have to see it
again so let's say that we want to find
the partial derivative of f with respect
to Z keeping y constant so what does
that
mean that means Y is
constant
Z
varies and X somehow is mysteriously a
function of Y and Z through this
equation and then of course because it
depends on y that means X will vary
sorry uh X depends on Y and Z and Z
varies so now we're asking ourselves
what's the rate of change of f with
respect to Z in this situation
and so we have two methods to do
that so let me start with the one with
differentials which hopefully you kind
of understood yesterday
but if not here's the second chance
so using differentials means that we'll
try to express DF in terms of DZ in this
particular situation okay so what do we
know about DF in general
well we know that DF is f subx DX plus F
suby Dy plus partial F partial Z
DZ that's the general statement but of
course we're in a speci case we in a
special case where first Y is
constant Y is constant means that we can
set Dy to be
zero okay so this goes away and becomes
zero the second thing is actually we
don't care about X we'd like to get rid
of X because it's this dependent
variable what we really want want to do
is Express DF only in terms of
DZ so what we
need is to
relate DX with
DZ well to do that we need to look at
how the variables are related so we need
to look at the constraint
G well how do we do that we look at the
differential of G okay so DG is G sub X
DX plus G suby
Dy plus G subz
DZ and that's zero because we're setting
G to always stay constant G doesn't
change if G doesn't change then we have
a relation between DX Dy and
DZ well in fact we said we going to look
only at the case where Y is constant so
y doesn't
change this becomes zero well now we
have our relation between DX and DZ we
know how X depends on Z and when we know
how X depends on Z we can plug that into
here and get how F depends on
Z okay let's do that
oh
uhoh
okay
so well so again saying that g cannot
change and keeping y constant tells us
GX DX plus gz DZ is zero and we'd like
to solve for DX in terms of DZ that
tells us DX should
be minus gz DZ ided by
GX okay so if you want this is the rate
of change of X with respect to Z when we
keep y constant in our new termin in our
terminology this is partial Z
no is partial X over partial Z with yeld
constant okay this is the rate of change
of X with respect to Z so now when we
know that we are going to plug that into
this equation
and that will tell
us that DF is f subx * DX well what is
DX DX is now minus gz over GX DZ plus FZ
DZ so that will be minus FX gz over GX
plus FZ *
DZ and so this coefficient here
here is the rate of change of f with
respect to Z in the situation we're
considering so this quantity is what we
call partial F over partial Z with yeld
constant that's what we wanted to
find
okay so now let's see another way to do
the same
calculation and then you can choose
which one you prefer
so we have a method
is using the chain
rule okay
so let's use the chain rule to
understand how F depends on Z when Y is
held
constant so let me first write the chain
rule brutally and then we'll try to
analyze what's going
on so you can just use the version that
I have up there as a template to see
what's going
on but I'm going
to explain
it more carefully
again okay so that's the most mechanical
and
no Mindless way of fighting down the
chain rule I'm just saying here let's
say that I'm varying Z keeping y
constant and I want to know how F
changes well F might change because X
might change y might y might change and
Z might change now how quickly does X
Change well the rate of change of X in
this situation is partial X partial Z
with Y held
constant so if I change X at this rate
then F will change at that
rate now y might change so the rate of
change of Y would be the rate of change
of Y respect to Z holding y constant uh
wait a second if Y is held constant then
y doesn't change so actually this guy is
zero and you didn't really have to write
that term but I wrote it just to be
systematic okay if y had been somehow
able to change at a certain rate then
that would have caused F to change at
that rate of course if f is held con
sorry if Y is held constant then nothing
happens here
and finally while Z is changing at a
certain rate this rate is this one and
that causes F to change at that rate and
then we add the effects together okay
see it's nothing but the good old chain
rule just I've put these extra
subscripts to tell us what is held
constant and what
isn't
okay now of course we can simplify it a
bit more because here how quickly does Z
change if I'm changing Z well the rate
of change of Z with respect to itself is
just
one
okay so in fact the really mysterious
part of this is the one here which is
the rate of change of X with respect to
Z and to find that we have to understand
the
constraint okay so how can we find the
rate of change of X with respect to Z
well we could use differentials like we
did here but we can also keep using the
chain
so how can I do that well I can just
look at how G would change with respect
to Z when Y is held constant so I just
do the same calculation but with G
instead of
F but before I do it let's ask ourselves
first what is this equal
to well if G is held constant then when
we VAR Z keeping y constant and changing
X well G still doesn't change it's held
constant so in fact that should be zero
okay but if we just say that we're not
we're not going to get to that so let's
see how we can compute that using the
chain rule well the chain rule tells us
G changes because X Y and Z
change okay how does it change because
of X well partial G partial x times the
rate of change of
X how does it change because of Y well
partial G partial y times the rate of
change of Y but of course if you're
smarter than me then you don't need to
actually write this one because Y is
held
constant and then there's the rate of
change because Z
changes and how quickly Z changes here
of course is
one okay so out of this you get
that well I'm tired of writing partial G
partial X let me just write G sub x
times partial X partial Z y constant
plus G
subz okay and now we found how X depends
on
Z partial X partial Z with Y constant is
netive G subz over G
subx now we plug this into that and we
get our
answer guess it go all the way up
here okay and then we get the answer I'm
not going to well I guess I can write it
again so that was partial F partial x
times this guyus G subz over G
subx Plus partial F over partial Z
and you can observe that this is exactly
the same formula that we had over
here in fact let's compare these two
methods side by side I claim we did
exactly the same thing just with
different
notations see if you take the
differential of F and you divide it by
DZ in this situation where Y is held
constant and so on you get exactly this
chain R up there right that chain roll
up there is this guy DF divided by DZ
with yeld
constant and the term involving Dy was
replaced by zero on both sides because
we knew actually that Y is held
constant now the real difficulty in both
cases comes from DX and what we do about
DX is we use the constraint so here we
use it by writing dgal Z here we write
the chain rule for G that's the same
thing just divided by DZ with yeld
constant okay so this formula or that
formula are the same just dividing by DZ
with yeld constant and then in both
cases we used that to solve for
DX and then we plugged into the formula
for DF to express DF DZ or partial F
partial Z with Y held
constant okay so the two methods are
pretty much the same quick pull who
prefers this
one who prefers that
one okay uh majority vote seems to be
for differentials but doesn't mean that
it's better okay both are
fine you can use whichever one you want
but you should give both a
try okay any
questions
yes sorry can we
use uh yes thank you I forgot to mention
it uh where did that go I think I've
erased that part so yes we need to
know directional
derivatives okay the pretty much the
only thing to remember about them is
that the fds in the direction of some
unit Vector U is just the gradient f
with
you so that's you know pretty much all
we know about
them um any other topics that I forgot
to
list
no
yes at time can I erase three boards at
a time no I would need three hands to do
that
okay
um let's see
okay I think what we should do for is
look quickly at you know the practice
test I mean given the time you will
mostly have to think about it yourselves
but
um so hopefully you have a copy of a
practice
exam oh yes okay so let's look at the
second so the first problem is a simple
problem find the gradient find
approximation formula hopefully you know
how to do that the second problem is one
about trading a contour plot and so
before I let you go for the weekend I
want to make sure that you actually know
how to read a contour
plot
so one thing I should first mention
is you know this problem asks you to
estimate partial derivatives by reading
a contour plot we haven't done that so
that won't be actually on the test will
be doing qualitative questions like what
is the sign of the partial derivative is
it zero less than Zer more than zero you
don't need to bring a ruler to estimate
partial derivatives in the way that this
problem asks you to
[Music]
[Applause]
okay I
guess
so okay so let's look at problem
2B problem 2B is asking you to find a
point at which H equals
2200 partial H partial x equals z and
partial H partial Y is less than zero so
let's try and see what is going on here
so a point where f equals
2200 well that should be probably on the
level curve that say is 2200 so I can
actually zoom
in
and here's here's the level
2200 okay now I want partial H partial X
to be zero that means if I change X
keeping y constant the value of H
doesn't change so which points on the
level curve satisfy that
property yeah the top and the bottom
okay if you here for example and you
move in the X
Direction well you see as you get to
there from the left the height first
increases and then decreases it goes for
a maximum at that point so at that point
the partial derivative is zero with
respect to X and same
here now we also we're also told and
let's find partial H partial y less than
zero so that means if we go north we
should go
down
well which one is it top or bottom top
top yes here if you go north then you go
from 2200 down to
2100 so this is
where the point
is so now the problem here was also
asking you to estimate partial H partial
Y and just if you're curious how you
would do that
well you would try to figure out how
long it takes before you reach the next
level curve okay and you see that so
here to go from here to
here so to go from Q to this new Point
say Q Prime the change in y while you'd
have to read the scale which was up down
here okay um that would be about
something like
300 what's the change in height when you
go from Q to Q Prime well you go down
from 2200 to 21100 that's about well
that's
actually minus 100
exactly okay and so Delta H over Delta Y
is about minus
1/3 well- 100 over 300 which is oops I'm
getting out of
minus 1/3 and that's the same I mean
that's an approximation for the partial
derivative okay so that's how you would
do
it now so okay let me go back
to other things so if you look at this
practice exam basically there's a bit of
everything and it's kind of you know
fairly representative of what might
happen um on Tuesday
so you know there will be a mix of easy
problems and of harder problems uh
expect something about you know
Computing gradients approximation stat
of change expect a problem about reading
a contour plot uh expect one about you
know a min max problem something about
lrange multipliers something about the
chain Rule and something about
constraint partial derivatives I mean
pretty much all the topics are going to
be there